BMI-203 Winter 2018
Homework 3
Due: 11:59pm February 23th, 2018

Answers should be submitted electronically via email to: seth.axen@gmail.com

This Zip file contains the following:

Pospairs.txt: a list of pairs of protein sequences that are related
Negpairs.txt: a list of pairs of protein sequences that are not related
sequences:    a folder containing all of the protein sequences in FASTA format

5 substitution matrices: BLOSUM62, BLOSUM50, PAM250, PAM100, and MATIO

Part 1

Implement the Smith-Waterman algorithm and instrument the code such
that it can use any scoring matrix provided (i.e. will read it in from
a separate file). You may adapt code you can obtain from the Web
(there are a number implementations you can find). 

However, if you choose to adapt someone else's code, you must indicate
the source, and this will incur a 2-point deduction (out of 10) for this
homework.

Answer the following questions:

1. Consider the false positive rate (proportion of negative pairs with
   scores that exceed a score threshold) when the true positive rate
   (proportion of positive pairs with scores above the threshold) is
   0.7. What's the best false positive rate that you can achieve with
   varying both gap opening (from 1 to 20) and extension penalties
   (from 1 to 5) with the BLOSUM50 matrix? What is the best gap
   penalty combination?

2. Using the gap penalties you determined from question 1, which of
   the provided scoring matrices performs the best, in terms of false
   positive rate (at a true positive rate of 0.7)? What are the
   performance rates of each of the matrices? Create a Receiver
   Operator Curve (ROC) graph which shows the fraction of true
   positives on the Y axis and the fraction of false positives on the
   X axis. Include on the graph data for each of the provided
   matrices. Please take care to make your ROC graphs square, with
   both X and Y axes limited to the range [0:1].

   Note, you can download ROC code from here: http://www.jainlab.org/Public/ucsf-roc.zip.
   It is not guaranteed to be bug free but it might save you some time.

3. How does the performance change if you normalize the Smith-Waterman
   scores by the length of the shortest sequence in a pair
   (i.e. divide the raw score by the min length)?  Show the ROC curves
   for your best matrix and for the same matrix with normalized
   scores. Are the false positive rates better or worse? Why do you
   think this is so?


Part 2

Using the best gap penalties and matrix from part 1, create an
alignment for each positive pair of sequences and each negative pair
of sequences. You will use these static alignments as a starting point
from which to optimize a scoring matrix to maximize separation of
scores of the positive and negative pairs.

1. Devise an optimization algorithm to modify the values in a starting
   score matrix such as to maximize the following objective function:
   sum of TP rates for FP rates of 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3. The maximum
   value for the objective function is 4.0 (where you are getting
   perfect separation of positive and negative pairs even at the
   lowest false positive rate). You should use the gap and extension
   penalties derived from Part 1. Remember, you must maintain symmetry
   in your matrix. You can make use of real-valued scores in the
   matrices if desired (this is probably a good idea).

2. Beginning from the best matrix from above (that which produced the
   alignments), run your optimization algorithm to maximize the
   fitness of the new matrix. How much improvement do you see in the
   fitness?  Show the full ROC curves for the original matrix and the
   optimized matrix. What happens when you now realign the sequences
   using the new matrix and rescore? Show the new ROC curve following
   realignment on the same graph as above. Qualitatively discuss how
   your matrix and your alignments change following optimization.

3. Beginning from the MATIO matrix, but using the same initial
   sequence alignments, re-run the optimization. Show the same ROC
   plots as for (2). Discuss the relationship between the results you
   see here and the results you saw for (2).

4. Describe your optimization algorithm briefly. How might you improve it?

5. What would be required in order to make a convincing case that an
   optimized matrix will be of general utility and will actually be
   beneficial for people to use in searching databases?

What to turn in:

A single PDF file containing your writeup, including all graphs and
discussion, followed by the optimized matrices you derived above,
followed by a listing of your code.
